README.md, before:

# Cosmos Validator Watcher

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

**Cosmos Validator Watcher** is a Prometheus exporter to help you monitor missed blocks on
any cosmos-based blockchains in real-time.

Features:

- Track when your validator **missed a block** (with solo option)
- Check how many validators missed the signatures for each block
- Track the current active set and check if your validator is **bonded** or **jailed**
- Track the **staked amount** as well as the min seat price
- Track **pending proposals** and check if your validator has voted (including proposal end time)
- Expose **upgrade plan** to know when the next upgrade will happen (including pending proposals)
- Trigger webhook when an upgrade happens

![Cosmos Validator Watcher Screenshot](assets/cosmos-validator-watcher-screenshot.jpg)

## ✨ Usage

Example for cosmoshub using 2 public RPC nodes and tracking 4 validators (with custom aliases).

### Via compiled binary

Compiled binary can be found on the [Releases page](https://github.com/kilnfi/cosmos-validator-watcher/releases).

```bash
cosmos-validator-watcher \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.publicnode.com:443 \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.polkachu.com:443 \
  --validator 3DC4DD610817606AD4A8F9D762A068A81E8741E2:kiln \
  --validator 25445D0EB353E9050AB11EC6197D5DCB611986DB:allnodes \
  --validator 9DF8E338C85E879BC84B0AAA28A08B431BD5B548:9df8e338 \
  --validator ABC1239871ABDEBCDE761D718978169BCD019739:random-name
```

### Via Docker

Latest Docker image can be found on the [Packages page](https://github.com/kilnfi/cosmos-validator-watcher/pkgs/container/cosmos-validator-watcher).

```bash
docker run --rm ghcr.io/kilnfi/cosmos-validator-watcher:latest \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.publicnode.com:443 \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.polkachu.com:443 \
  --validator 3DC4DD610817606AD4A8F9D762A068A81E8741E2:kiln \
  --validator 25445D0EB353E9050AB11EC6197D5DCB611986DB:allnodes \
  --validator 9DF8E338C85E879BC84B0AAA28A08B431BD5B548:9df8e338 \
  --validator ABC1239871ABDEBCDE761D718978169BCD019739:random-name
```

### Available options

```
cosmos-validator-watcher --help

NAME:
   cosmos-validator-watcher - Real-time Cosmos-based chains monitoring tool

USAGE:
   cosmos-validator-watcher [global options] command [command options] [arguments...]

COMMANDS:
   help, h  Shows a list of commands or help for one command

GLOBAL OPTIONS:
   --chain-id value                         to ensure all nodes matches the specific network (dismiss to auto-detected)
   --http-addr value                        http server address (default: ":8080")
   --log-level value                        log level (debug, info, warn, error) (default: "info")
   --namespace value                        namespace for Prometheus metrics (default: "cosmos_validator_watcher")
   --no-color                               disable colored output (default: false)
   --node value [ --node value ]            rpc node endpoint to connect to (specify multiple for high availability) (default: "http://localhost:26657")
   --no-gov                                 disable calls to gov module (useful for consumer chains) (default: false)
   --no-staking                             disable calls to staking module (useful for consumer chains) (default: false)
   --no-commission                          disable calls to get validator commission (useful for chains without distribution module) (default: false)
   --no-upgrade                             disable calls to upgrade module (for chains created without the upgrade module) (default: false)
   --denom value                            denom used in metrics label (eg. atom or uatom)
   --denom-exponent value                   denom exponent (eg. 6 for atom, 1 for uatom) (default: 0)
   --start-timeout value                    timeout to wait on startup for one node to be ready (default: 10s)
   --stop-timeout value                     timeout to wait on stop (default: 10s)
   --validator value [ --validator value ]  validator address(es) to track (use :my-label to add a custom label in metrics & ouput)
   --webhook-url value                      endpoint where to send upgrade webhooks (experimental)
   --x-gov value                            version of the gov module to use (v1|v1beta1) (default: "v1")
   --help, -h                               show help
   --version, -v                            print the version
```


## ❇️ Endpoints

- `/metrics` exposed Prometheus metrics (see next section)
- `/ready` responds OK when at least one of the nodes is synced (ie. `.SyncInfo.catching_up` is `false`)
- `/live` responds OK as soon as server is up & running correctly


## 📊 Prometheus metrics

All metrics are by default prefixed by `cosmos_validator_watcher` but this can be changed through options.

Metrics (without prefix)   | Description
---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------
`active_set`               | Number of validators in the active set
`block_height`             | Latest known block height (all nodes mixed up)
`commission`               | Earned validator commission
`is_bonded`                | Set to 1 if the validator is bonded
`is_jailed`                | Set to 1 if the validator is jailed
`missed_blocks`            | Number of missed blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`consecutive_missed_blocks`| Number of consecutive missed blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`node_block_height`        | Latest fetched block height for each node
`node_synced`              | Set to 1 is the node is synced (ie. not catching-up)
`proposal_end_time`        | Timestamp of the voting end time of a proposal
`proposed_blocks`          | Number of proposed blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`rank`                     | Rank of the validator
`seat_price`               | Min seat price to be in the active set (ie. bonded tokens of the latest validator)
`skipped_blocks`           | Number of blocks skipped (ie. not tracked) since start
`solo_missed_blocks`       | Number of missed blocks per validator, unless the block is missed by many other validators
`tokens`                   | Number of staked tokens per validator
`tracked_blocks`           | Number of blocks tracked since start
`transactions`             | Number of transactions since start
`validated_blocks`         | Number of validated blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`vote`                     | Set to 1 if the validator has voted on a proposal
`upgrade_plan`             | Block height of the upcoming upgrade (hard fork)


## ❓FAQ

### Which blockchains are compatible?

Any blockchains based on the cosmos-sdk should work:

- cosmoshub
- celestia
- cronos
- dydx
- evmos
- injective
- kava
- osmosis
- persistence
- dymension
- zetachain
- ...

This app is using the [CometBFT library](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/) (successor of Tendermint) as well as the `x/staking` module from the [Cosmos-SDK](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk).

### How to get your validator pubkey address?

**Option 1**: use `tendermint show-validator` to get the pubkey and `debug pubkey` to convert to hex format.

```bash
CLI_NAME=gaiad
ADDRESS="$($CLI_NAME debug pubkey "$($CLI_NAME tendermint show-validator)" 2>&1 | grep "Address")"
ADDRESS="${ADDRESS##* 0x}"
ADDRESS="${ADDRESS##* }"
echo "${ADDRESS^^}"
```

(replace `gaiad` by the binary name or the desired chain, eg. `evmosd`, `strided`, `injectived`, …).

**Option 2**: use the `cosmos-validator-watcher debug consensus-key` sub command:

```bash
cosmos-validator-watcher debug validator \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.publicnode.com:443 \
  cosmosvaloper1uxlf7mvr8nep3gm7udf2u9remms2jyjqvwdul2
```

Notes:
- the `--node` flag must be placed before the validator address)
- this doesns't work for consumer chains (neutron, stride) since they don't rely on the `staking` module


## 📃 License

[MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

chore: mention cosmos-watcher-stack in readme

README.md, after:

# Cosmos Validator Watcher

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

**Cosmos Validator Watcher** is a Prometheus exporter to help you monitor missed blocks on
any cosmos-based blockchains in real-time.

Features:

- Track when your validator **missed a block** (with solo option)
- Check how many validators missed the signatures for each block
- Track the current active set and check if your validator is **bonded** or **jailed**
- Track the **staked amount** as well as the min seat price
- Track **pending proposals** and check if your validator has voted (including proposal end time)
- Expose **upgrade plan** to know when the next upgrade will happen (including pending proposals)
- Trigger webhook when an upgrade happens

![Cosmos Validator Watcher Screenshot](assets/cosmos-validator-watcher-screenshot.jpg)

## ✨ Usage

Example for cosmoshub using 2 public RPC nodes and tracking 4 validators (with custom aliases).

### Via compiled binary

Compiled binary can be found on the [Releases page](https://github.com/kilnfi/cosmos-validator-watcher/releases).

```bash
cosmos-validator-watcher \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.publicnode.com:443 \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.polkachu.com:443 \
  --validator 3DC4DD610817606AD4A8F9D762A068A81E8741E2:kiln \
  --validator 25445D0EB353E9050AB11EC6197D5DCB611986DB:allnodes \
  --validator 9DF8E338C85E879BC84B0AAA28A08B431BD5B548:9df8e338 \
  --validator ABC1239871ABDEBCDE761D718978169BCD019739:random-name
```

### Via Docker

Latest Docker image can be found on the [Packages page](https://github.com/kilnfi/cosmos-validator-watcher/pkgs/container/cosmos-validator-watcher).

```bash
docker run --rm ghcr.io/kilnfi/cosmos-validator-watcher:latest \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.publicnode.com:443 \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.polkachu.com:443 \
  --validator 3DC4DD610817606AD4A8F9D762A068A81E8741E2:kiln \
  --validator 25445D0EB353E9050AB11EC6197D5DCB611986DB:allnodes \
  --validator 9DF8E338C85E879BC84B0AAA28A08B431BD5B548:9df8e338 \
  --validator ABC1239871ABDEBCDE761D718978169BCD019739:random-name
```

### Available options

```
cosmos-validator-watcher --help

NAME:
   cosmos-validator-watcher - Real-time Cosmos-based chains monitoring tool

USAGE:
   cosmos-validator-watcher [global options] command [command options] [arguments...]

COMMANDS:
   help, h  Shows a list of commands or help for one command

GLOBAL OPTIONS:
   --chain-id value                         to ensure all nodes matches the specific network (dismiss to auto-detected)
   --http-addr value                        http server address (default: ":8080")
   --log-level value                        log level (debug, info, warn, error) (default: "info")
   --namespace value                        namespace for Prometheus metrics (default: "cosmos_validator_watcher")
   --no-color                               disable colored output (default: false)
   --node value [ --node value ]            rpc node endpoint to connect to (specify multiple for high availability) (default: "http://localhost:26657")
   --no-gov                                 disable calls to gov module (useful for consumer chains) (default: false)
   --no-staking                             disable calls to staking module (useful for consumer chains) (default: false)
   --no-commission                          disable calls to get validator commission (useful for chains without distribution module) (default: false)
   --no-upgrade                             disable calls to upgrade module (for chains created without the upgrade module) (default: false)
   --denom value                            denom used in metrics label (eg. atom or uatom)
   --denom-exponent value                   denom exponent (eg. 6 for atom, 1 for uatom) (default: 0)
   --start-timeout value                    timeout to wait on startup for one node to be ready (default: 10s)
   --stop-timeout value                     timeout to wait on stop (default: 10s)
   --validator value [ --validator value ]  validator address(es) to track (use :my-label to add a custom label in metrics & ouput)
   --webhook-url value                      endpoint where to send upgrade webhooks (experimental)
   --x-gov value                            version of the gov module to use (v1|v1beta1) (default: "v1")
   --help, -h                               show help
   --version, -v                            print the version
```


## ❇️ Endpoints

- `/metrics` exposed Prometheus metrics (see next section)
- `/ready` responds OK when at least one of the nodes is synced (ie. `.SyncInfo.catching_up` is `false`)
- `/live` responds OK as soon as server is up & running correctly


## 📊 Prometheus metrics

All metrics are by default prefixed by `cosmos_validator_watcher` but this can be changed through options.

Metrics (without prefix)   | Description
---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------
`active_set`               | Number of validators in the active set
`block_height`             | Latest known block height (all nodes mixed up)
`commission`               | Earned validator commission
`is_bonded`                | Set to 1 if the validator is bonded
`is_jailed`                | Set to 1 if the validator is jailed
`missed_blocks`            | Number of missed blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`consecutive_missed_blocks`| Number of consecutive missed blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`node_block_height`        | Latest fetched block height for each node
`node_synced`              | Set to 1 is the node is synced (ie. not catching-up)
`proposal_end_time`        | Timestamp of the voting end time of a proposal
`proposed_blocks`          | Number of proposed blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`rank`                     | Rank of the validator
`seat_price`               | Min seat price to be in the active set (ie. bonded tokens of the latest validator)
`skipped_blocks`           | Number of blocks skipped (ie. not tracked) since start
`solo_missed_blocks`       | Number of missed blocks per validator, unless the block is missed by many other validators
`tokens`                   | Number of staked tokens per validator
`tracked_blocks`           | Number of blocks tracked since start
`transactions`             | Number of transactions since start
`validated_blocks`         | Number of validated blocks per validator (for a bonded validator)
`vote`                     | Set to 1 if the validator has voted on a proposal
`upgrade_plan`             | Block height of the upcoming upgrade (hard fork)

For an example of a Prometheus and Grafana dashboard setup using Docker Compose, you can refer to [21state/cosmos-watcher-stack](https://github.com/21state/cosmos-watcher-stack/).


## ❓FAQ

### Which blockchains are compatible?

Any blockchains based on the cosmos-sdk should work:

- cosmoshub
- celestia
- cronos
- dydx
- evmos
- injective
- kava
- osmosis
- persistence
- dymension
- zetachain
- ...

This app is using the [CometBFT library](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/) (successor of Tendermint) as well as the `x/staking` module from the [Cosmos-SDK](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk).

### How to get your validator pubkey address?

**Option 1**: use `tendermint show-validator` to get the pubkey and `debug pubkey` to convert to hex format.

```bash
CLI_NAME=gaiad
ADDRESS="$($CLI_NAME debug pubkey "$($CLI_NAME tendermint show-validator)" 2>&1 | grep "Address")"
ADDRESS="${ADDRESS##* 0x}"
ADDRESS="${ADDRESS##* }"
echo "${ADDRESS^^}"
```

(replace `gaiad` by the binary name or the desired chain, eg. `evmosd`, `strided`, `injectived`, …).

**Option 2**: use the `cosmos-validator-watcher debug consensus-key` sub command:

```bash
cosmos-validator-watcher debug validator \
  --node https://cosmos-rpc.publicnode.com:443 \
  cosmosvaloper1uxlf7mvr8nep3gm7udf2u9remms2jyjqvwdul2
```

Notes:
- the `--node` flag must be placed before the validator address)
- this doesns't work for consumer chains (neutron, stride) since they don't rely on the `staking` module


## 📃 License

[MIT License](LICENSE).
